# FP4-proposal
Project Proposal is due 2015-04-08 at 8am

# Team: Synth Loaf

# Project Title: The Sherman Keyboard
### Problem Statement
The emulation of instruments via audio signal processing is a challenging task and racket provides the tools for generating and manipulating simple sine waves through several different libraries. These libraries can be used to create more complex sounds that emulate the characteristics of real life instruments. Our project will be a synthesizer that will give the user the ability to program their own complex sounds by adjusting different settings built into the UI as well as the ability to use interesting pre-configured settings that sound similar to real instruments.

### Problem Analysis
Any musical instrument is an abstraction away from how tones are created and will be a core concept when developing this instrument to provide an intuitive interface. Abstraction will also be used to create complex systems out of simple lines of code. Modularity between the different areas of this project will be essential when developing an easily maintainable code base. There must be a nice and clear work flow from when a user interacts with the synthesizer and when tones are generated by library calls. Object orientation may prove to be useful when developing abstract data types that will be manipulated.

### Data set or other source materials
* There will be no external data required for this project. All audio will be self generating through calls to racket libraries.

* The following sources, along with any others, will be used as reference for understanding how to modify sine waves to add effects and to emulate different instruments:

  * http://www.soundonsound.com/search?url=%2Fsearch&Keyword=%22synth+secrets%22&Words=All&Summary=Yes
  * http://www.planetoftunes.com/synthesis/emulating-real-instruments-with-subtractive-synthesis.html#.VSP75cuan7B
  * http://www.pd-tutorial.com/english/
  * http://drpetter.se/article_sound.html
  * http://music.columbia.edu/cmc/musicandcomputers/chapter4/04_09.php

### Deliverable and Demonstration
By the end of this project we will have a working synthesizer that produces complex sounds using sine waves. We will implement a number of features available for the user to interact with that will alter the sounds produced by the synthesizer.

### Evaluation of Results
We will know that we are successful when have an easy to use synthesizer that is enjoyable to play. The synthesizer should come with several different features that a user can manipulate and the synthesizer should be able to play any combinations keys displayed on the UI.

## Work Plan and Schedule
First we will create a working UI that plays very basic sounds. In parallel we will research and experiment with additive synthesis to understand how to incorporate different user settings into the UI to manipulate the audio waves. Development on the UI will continue to ensure that it is visually appealing and intuitive to use. Some interface settings should be implemented at this point. During the final phase of development the work done on the backend will be interfaced by the UI.

### First Milestone (04-13)
- On this day, we will have a working UI that resembles a keyboard and supports user interaction via mouse clicks. At this stage, since our primary concern is event handling, the ability to play pure sine waves whose frequencies correspond to the piano keys selected from the UI is sufficient enough. 

- Research will be done and some basic audio manipulation procedures will be developed to further extend control over sine waves that can be generated. 

### Second Milestone (04-21)
- On this day, we will have developed procedures capable of generating sine waves based on provided property values such as frequency, amplitude, phase offset, and possibly dynamic envelope data. 

- These property values will be added to the UI to provide users with a greater pallet of options that can be utilized when generating custom sounds. At this point, in addition to playing the fundamental frequency (the note selected on the UI), users will have the ability to add more sine waves to a given fundamental frequency in order to create more complex sounds. The property values of these additional sine waves will be visible and mutable from the UI. The UI will also contain a master volume slider. 

- Synthesizer will accept input from both the mouse and the keyboard.

### Final Deliverable (05-01)
 * On this day all of the backend work should be merged with the UI to create the working synthesizer, if it is not already done by the demonstration date.

## Group Responsibilities
Here each group member gets a section where they, as an individual, detail what they are responsible for in this
project. Each group member writes their own Responsibility section. Include the milestones and final deliverable.

### Stuart Tomkins
##### First Milestone:

* A rudimentary UI layout resembling a keyboard that can play basic notes with mouse clicks.

##### Second Milestone:

* A more fleshed out keyboard layout that is intuitive to play and visually appealing. It will also feature more complex event handling for processing user input such as playing combinations of keys via the mapping of screen keys to keyboard keys.

##### Final Deliverable:

* The UI will be a direct interface into the backend system developed. The UI will allow the user to modify sine waves to play complex sounds.


### Eamon Lightning
I will become well acquainted with the port audio library to better understand how it represents and processes audio. In doing so, I'll learn how to manipulate individual sine waves and combine them in order to form more complex waves. I intend to solve the imminent issue of clipping by figuring out how to normalize the amplitude of the resultant complex wave that is generated by adding individual sine waves. I also want to explore the possibility of adding dynamic envelopes (ADSR) to the audio. 

### Kevin Wacome 
I will be contributing to the UI by working on the section that allows users to manipulate different sine wave properties to create different audio effects and to emulate the characteritics and timbres of popular instruments, and provide users with a selectable list of audio presets. 

##### First Milestone:

  * Some audio effects will be a lot more challenging than others to implement and some may be beyond the scope of this project. For my first milestone I will research different audio effects and implement procedures that modify the attack, decay and volume of a tone being played. Attack is how fast a tone takes from being at a volume of 0 too 100%.
Decay is how long a note plays clearly before 'dying' out.

##### Second Milestone:

  * By this day the effects that I implemented on the previous milestone should be UI settings that a user can adjust. I would like to emulate as many effects as I can from the following list:

    * delay: records an input signal and then plays it back after a period of time.
    * chorus: individual sounds with roughly the same timbre and nearly the same pitch converge and are played in unison.
    * flanging: mix two identical signals together, one signal delayed by a small and gradually changing period
    * harmonzier: setting to allow other notes to be played in unison with the note played by user.
    * vibrato: a setting that causes the frequency of a wave to shift slightly over its duration.

  * I will continue to keep researching the characteristics of different types of instruments and keep experimenting with adjusting the properties of sine waves to try and emulate real instruments as best as I can.

##### Final Deliverable:

  * By this date I will have implemented as many effects as I could and the UI will have a selection of different working effects that a user can adjust via the UI. Also it should have a selection of different audio presets that a user can select that attempt to emulate different instrument sounds.

## Proposal Presentation Link

https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1FuxFHALw1LRU1OaHun4YQsiwaE7rN1SE4YsC0nTrCWk/edit?usp=sharing

<!-- Links -->
[piazza]: https://piazza.com/class/i55is8xqqwhmr?cid=453
[markdown]: https://help.github.com/articles/markdown-basics/
